                   Evaluating Cross-Sectional Forecasting Models for

                                       Implied Cost of Capital


                                                       by

                                                Kevin Li
                                          University of Toronto
                                       kevin.li@rotman.utoronto.ca


                                                      and

                                          Partha Mohanram*
                                         University of Toronto
                                 partha.mohanram@rotman.utoronto.ca


                  Forthcoming in the Review of Accounting Studies (2014)


Abstract: The computation of implied cost of capital (ICC) is constrained by the fact that around
half of all firms do not have analysts’ earnings forecasts. Hou, van Dijk and Zhang (2012, HVZ)
present a cross-sectional model to generate forecasts and compute ICC from these forecasts.
However, the forecasts from the HVZ model perform worse than those from a naïve random
walk model and show anomalous correlations with risk factors. We present two parsimonious
alternatives to the HVZ model: the EP model based on the persistence in earnings and the RI
model based on the residual income model from Feltham and Ohlson (1996). We show that both
models outperform the HVZ model in terms of forecast bias, accuracy and earnings response
coefficients. Further, the ICC metrics generated from the EP and RI models outperform those
from the HVZ model in terms of correlations with future returns and risk factors. We recommend
that future research use the RI model or the EP model to generate earnings forecasts.




*Corresponding author, Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, 105 St. George Street, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 3E6, Canada. We would like to thank Jim Ohlson (the editor), Mei Feng (the discussant), two
anonymous referees, Patricia Dechow, Jacob Thomas, Franco Wong, Scott Richardson and seminar participants at
Boston University, Erasmus University, University of British Columbia, University of Miami, University of Toronto
and 2013 Review of Accounting Studies Conference for helpful comments. All errors are our own.
1. Introduction

       Cost of equity plays a central role in valuation, portfolio selection, and capital budgeting.

Therefore, measuring and validating cost of equity metrics has been the subject of much

research. Inferring cost of equity ex-post from realized returns is problematic because the

correlation between expected returns and realized returns is weak (Elton 1999). Prior research

has often documented a weak or even non-existent relation between conventional measures of

risk (e.g.,  and realized returns (Fama and French 1992). This has led to the use of implied cost

of capital (ICC), which is the discount rate that equates current stock price to the present value of

expected future dividends.

       Prior literature has taken different approaches towards measuring ICC. Gebhardt, Lee and

Swaminathan (2001) and Claus and Thomas (2001) use variants of the residual income model to

solve for the discount rate that equates price to the sum of book value and the present value of

future abnormal earnings. Gode and Mohanram (2003) and Easton (2004) develop proxies based

on the abnormal earnings growth model of Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005). The common

feature of all these approaches to measuring ICC is a reliance on analysts’ EPS forecasts. This

causes two shortcomings for researchers looking to obtain a reliable proxy for expected returns.

First, analyst forecasts are available only for a subset of firms, with almost half of all firms not

having analyst coverage in most years. This problem is not trivial because most of the firms

without analyst following are typically small and young firms - the kind of firms that would be

of the greatest interest to researchers examining issues related to information asymmetry,

earnings quality and disclosure where an ICC approach is used most often. Second, an extensive

literature has shown that the ICC proxies derived from analyst forecasts are unreliable showing




                                                 1
weak correlations with future returns (Easton and Monahan 2005) and anomalous correlations

with risk factors.

        A recent paper by Hou, van Dijk and Zhang (2012), henceforth HVZ, offers an interesting

approach towards addressing these shortcomings. HVZ run cross-sectional regressions using

lagged information to estimate future earnings for horizons of one to five years. The model they

use builds on models in Fama and French (2000, 2006) and regresses future earnings on total

assets, dividends, earnings and accruals. They use the earnings forecasts from the model to

generate ICC estimates based on the approaches in prior literature. HVZ show that their model

addresses the shortcomings of relying on analyst forecasts, by providing reliable ICC estimates

for a wide cross-section of firms. HVZ show that the model-based ICC generally outperforms the

ICC derived from analysts’ forecasts. Not surprisingly, the HVZ model has been used in recent

research on accounting based valuation (Chang, Landsman and Monahan 2012) and ICC (e.g.,

Jones and Tuzel 2012; Lee, So and Wang 2011; Patatoukas 2011).

        Given the growing attention to the HVZ model, it is imperative to test the model for the

following reasons. First, HVZ test only one model and do not benchmark it against other cross-

sectional models. Although they show that their ICC estimates are correlated with future returns

at the portfolio level, they do not examine the relation between ICC estimates and future returns

at the firm level like the prior studies (Gebhardt, Lee and Swaminathan 2001; Gode and

Mohanram 2003). In addition, their ICC estimates show many anomalous relations with risk

factors, including negative correlations with systematic and idiosyncratic risk.

        Second, a recent paper by Gerakos and Gramacy (2013) shows that the HVZ model

actually underperforms a naïve random walk model that simply sets future earnings to past

earnings. However, a random walk model is impractical for many implied cost of capital metrics

                                                 2
that anchor on estimates of short term growth. Further, the level of forecast errors reported in the

HVZ model is rather high – the mean absolute error (scaled by price) for one-year-ahead

earnings is 0.084 for firms with analyst coverage (Table 3 of HVZ, page 9). If one assumes an

average P/E ratio of 12, this represents an absolute error that is on average equal to the estimate

of earnings itself. More importantly, the HVZ model generates larger forecast errors for firms

without analyst coverage where the need for a forecasting model is crucial. Our partition results

indicate that the average absolute forecast error for one-year-ahead earnings for this group

generated by the HVZ model is more than twice as large as that for firms with analyst coverage.

       The goal of this paper is to build better cross-sectional models to forecast future earnings

(EPS). We present and test two parsimonious alternatives to the HVZ model. The first model (EP

model) forecasts earnings as a function of past earnings, allowing for the differential persistence

of profits and losses. The second model (RI model) is motivated by the residual income valuation

models in Ohlson (1995), Feltham and Ohlson (1995, 1996) and incorporates book value and

accruals in addition to earnings. We benchmark the HVZ model and our two proposed models

against a naïve random walk (RW) model.

       We test the HVZ model and the above three alternative models along the following

dimensions. We first evaluate the four models on the basis of forecast accuracy and bias. We then

look at the earnings response coefficients (ERC), measured as the correlation between forecast

surprise and future abnormal returns. Finally, we examine the properties of the ICC obtained by

applying forecasts from these models to the commonly used ICC proxies, in terms of correlations

with realized returns as well as correlations with risk factors.

       We find that both the RI model and the EP model outperform the HVZ model in terms of

forecast accuracy, forecast bias and ERC. On average, the forecasts for the whole Compustat

                                                  3
population from the RI model are 28% to 38% more accurate than the forecasts from the HVZ

model for the one-year to three-year ahead forecast horizons. The improvement is as large as

45% in small firms and firms without analyst coverage, where model-based forecasts are more

relevant and important. On average, the ERCs of the RI and the EP forecasts are 18% to 85%

larger than the ERCs of the HVZ forecasts, indicating that the RI and the EP forecasts better

represent market expectations. Consistent with Gerakos and Gramacy (2013), we find that the

HVZ model significantly underperforms the naïve random walk model in terms of forecast

accuracy, bias, and ERC, in the full sample as well as in the subsamples of small firms and firms

without analyst coverage. On average, the absolute forecast errors from the RW model are 13%

to 37% smaller than the forecast errors from the HVZ model.

       We examine the correlation between ICCs derived from the forecasts and future returns

along two dimensions – return spreads between ICC quintiles, and firm level regressions of

future returns on ICC. We find that both the EP model and the RI model perform better than the

HVZ model in terms of portfolio return spreads. Firm-level regressions indicate that the HVZ

model produces ICC metrics with the weakest correlation with future realized returns, while the

ICC metrics from the RI model show the strongest correlations with future returns.

       We also examine the correlation between the ICC measures and risk factors, consistent

with the analysis in Gebhardt, Lee and Swaminathan (2001), Gode and Mohanram (2003), and

Botosan and Plumlee (2005). We find that the ICCs based on the RI model show expected

correlations with most risk factors. In contrast, the ICCs based on the HVZ model always show

an anomalous negative correlation with systematic risk () and an insignificant correlation with

idiosyncratic risk and analyst following.




                                               4
        To summarize, we provide two models (RI and EP) that outperform the HVZ model on

all dimensions – forecast accuracy, bias, ERC, and correlations of ICC proxies with future

returns and risk factors. In addition to their superior performance, both models are grounded in

prior theoretical and empirical research in accounting, and are relatively parsimonious. Among

the two models, the RI model performs marginally better on most dimensions. We recommend

that future research use the RI model as the appropriate cross-sectional model to forecast future

earnings.1

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the HVZ model

and the alternative models developed in this paper. Section 3 discusses the data and empirical

execution. Section 4 compares the models on forecast accuracy, bias and ERC. Section 5

examines the properties of ICC estimates derived from the forecasts. Section 6 discusses the

results of sensitivity analyses. Section 7 concludes with implications for future research.



2. The Models

2.1 The HVZ Model

        The model developed in HVZ is an extension of the cross-sectional profitability models

in Fama and French (2000, 2006), Hou and Robinson (2006), and Hou and van Dijk (2011). The

model is specified as:

                 Et+ = 0 + 1*At + 2*D t + 3*DD t + 4*E t + 5*NegE t + 6*ACt                       (1)




1
  In our exploration of alternative forecast models, we observe that parsimonious models in general outperform
complex models. For example, we test the forecast model of Abarbanell and Bushee (1997), which is based on the
forecast approach by analysts, a model that forecasts future sales growth and profit margins, and a model that
combines RI and HVZ. None of these more complex models outperforms the EP model or the RI model.

                                                      5
where Et+is earnings in year t+ (=1 to 5), At is total assets, Dt is dividends, DDt is an indicator

variable for dividend paying firms, Et is earnings, NegEt is an indicator variable for loss firms

and ACt is working capital accruals. The regression is estimated using the previous ten years of

data, ensuring no look-ahead bias (i.e., the regression for one-year-ahead earnings in year t uses

data from year t-10 to t-1, or two-year-ahead regression uses data from year t-11 to t-2, etc.).

Consistent with HVZ, we estimate the regression at the dollar level with unscaled data.2

Forecasted earnings for the next five years are estimated by using the coefficients from the above

regressions and year t data for each firm. The main advantage of the cross-sectional approach is

that it does not impose any survivorship requirement as time series models do. See Appendix A

for details of the empirical execution for the HVZ model and the models introduced in this paper.


2.2 The RW Model

        We include random walk (RW) model as the naïve benchmark. Although the forecasts

from the RW model are not suitable for estimating ICC because they do not allow for growth in

earnings, the RW model provides an intuitive benchmark against which to evaluate other

earnings forecast models. The RW model does not rely on any parameters. It is specified as:

                                                    Et+ = Et +                                               (2)


2.3 The EP Model

        The earnings persistence (EP) model is one simple extension of the RW model. It allows

for growth in earnings, and hence the forecasts generated by the EP model can be used for ICC

estimation. The EP model is specified as:


2
 We estimate the HVZ model at the dollar level as it is specified in their paper. We also perform robustness test by
estimating the HVZ model at the per-share level. The inference still holds.

                                                         6
                          Et+ = 0 + 1*NegEt + 2*Et + 3*NegE*Et +                         (3)

We include the indicator for negative earnings (NegE) and its interaction term with earnings

(NegE*E) to allow for different persistence of profit and loss firms (Li 2011). We estimate the

regression using the same approach of HVZ – i.e., we use lagged ten years of data to estimate the

models using all firms with available data and then apply the regression coefficients to firm-

specific data to estimate the expected values for each firm. We run the regression at the per-share

level by scaling all variables by the number of shares outstanding.


2.4 The RI Model

       One potential drawback of the HVZ model is the reliance on dividends as opposed to

earnings and book values. Miller and Modigliani (1961) prove that, ignoring taxes and

contracting costs, dividends are irrelevant for asset pricing. As an alternative to the traditional

dividend discount valuation models, the residual income valuation model derives the relation

between price, book value and earnings. The residual income valuation model was developed in

early work by Preinreich (1936), Edwards and Bell (1961) and Peasnell (1982), and formalized

more recently in a series of papers by Ohlson (1995), Feltham and Ohlson (1995, 1996).

       Ohlson (1995) presents a basic model where future residual income depends on current

residual income and other information. Feltham and Ohlson (1995) introduce the balance sheet

effect of conservatism, which can mechanically increase future residual income because of lower

book values. Feltham and Ohlson (1996) further introduce the income statement effect of

conservatism through capital expenditures (accruals), which will depress future residual income.

Feltham and Ohlson (1996) express future residual income using the following equation

(notation simplified):


                                                7
                                       RIt+1 = 1*RIt + 2*Bt + 3*capxt +                      (4)

where B is book value and RI is residual income. In Eq. (4), 1 and  are expected to be

positive and lie between zero and one, while 3 is expected to be negative. As the definition of

residual income implies that RIt = Et – r*Bt-1 and RIt+1 = Et+1 – r*Bt, we can substitute for RIt and

RIt+1 in Eq. (4) and solve for Et+1:

                            Et+1 = 1*Et + (2 + r)*Bt + (-1* r)*Bt-1 + 3*capxt +             (5)

Based on Eq. (5), our procedure to estimate future earnings is

                                 Et+1 = χ0 + χ1*Et + χ2*Bt + χ3*Bt-1 + χ4*capxt +               (6)

           In Feltham and Ohlson (1996), capital expenditures refer to all expenditures on assets

(not just PP&E as capital expenditures normally pertain to). Accordingly, we set capx to total

accruals (TACC from Richardson et al. 2005). We modify Eq. (6) by introducing an interaction

term between Et and a loss dummy (NegE*E). We also remove book value in year t-1 to reduce

additional data requirement.3 The equation we estimate is hence:

                     Et+ = χ0 + χ1*NegEt + χ2*Et + χ3*NegEt*Et + χ4*Bt + χ5*TACCt +           

           We expect the coefficients χ2 and χ4 to be positive representing the persistence of

earnings, χ3 to be negative representing the lower persistence of losses (Li 2011), and χ5 to be

negative representing the effects of conservatism. We estimate the regression on per-share level

using the same cross-sectional approach of HVZ.




3
    The model including Bt-1 produces essentially the same results.

                                                            8
3. Data and Empirical Execution

3.1 Data

        Our estimation sample includes all firms on the Compustat fundamentals annual file up to

2012. We collect stock returns from the CRSP monthly return file and analyst information from

the IBES summary file. The earnings number we estimate is the earnings before special and

extraordinary items.4 Appendix A provides the variable definitions for each model. To minimize

the effect of outliers, we winsorize all variables annually at the 1st and 99th percentiles.


3.2 Earnings Forecasts for Year t+1 to Year t+5

        We follow the methodology in HVZ to estimate the cross-sectional forecast models and

the predicted earnings for year t+1 to year t+5. Specifically, for each year between 1969 and

2012, we estimate the three cross-sectional models (HVZ, EP and RI) using all available

observations over the past ten years. For example, if 2000 is the year t, we use data from 1990 to

1999 to estimate the coefficients that will be used to compute the earnings of 2001 (year t+1).

Similarly, we use data from 1989 to 1998 to estimate the coefficients that will be used to

compute the earnings of 2002 (year t+2). This ensures that the earnings forecasts are strictly out

of sample. We estimate each model as of June 30 of each year. To further reduce look-ahead

bias, we assume that financial information for firms with fiscal year ending (FYE) in April to

June is not available on June 30. In other words, only the financials of firms with FYE from

April of year t-1 to March of year t are used for estimation of year t. For each firm and each year

t in our sample, we compute earnings forecasts for year t+1 to year t+5 by multiplying the


4
  This represents a departure from HVZ as they estimate earnings before extraordinary items, without excluding
special items. We exclude special items because they are less predictable by nature. We perform robustness test
using earnings before extraordinary items. The forecast errors are bigger for all models. However, the inferences do
not change as the rank ordering of the models in terms of forecast accuracy and ERCs is unaltered..

                                                         9
independent variables in year t with the pooled regression coefficients estimated using the

previous ten years of data. This method only requires a firm have non-missing independent

variables in year t to estimate its future earnings. As a result, the survivorship bias is kept to a

minimum. We set the missing value of AC and TACC to zero. However, the results are robust

without this requirement.


3.3 Forecast Bias and Accuracy

        Our first set of performance measures used to evaluate the models is forecast bias and

accuracy. Forecast bias is the difference between actual earnings and earnings forecasts. We

scale bias by end-of-June market value of equity if the model forecasts dollar earnings (the HVZ

and RW models), or by end-of-June stock price if the model forecasts earnings per share (the EP

and RI models). Forecast accuracy is defined as the absolute value of forecast bias.


3.4 Estimating the ERC

        The second performance measure is the earnings response coefficient (ERC) of the

forecasts. We estimate the ERC using the sum of the quarterly earnings announcement returns

(market-adjusted, from day-1 to day+1) over the next one, two, and three years on firm-specific

unexpected earnings (i.e., the forecast bias) measured over the same horizon.5 We standardize the

unexpected earnings so that they have unit variance each year. As a result, the ERCs are

comparable among all model-based forecasts.


3.5 Estimating the ICC Metrics



5
 We also perform robustness test by estimating the cumulative ERC the same way as the “Annual ERC” in HVZ.
Specifically, we estimate ERCs by regressing the buy-and-hold returns over the next one, two, and three years on the
unexpected earnings over the same horizon. The tenor of the results does not change.

                                                        10
       We use forecasts from the three cross-sectional models (HVZ, EP and RI) to estimate

implied cost of capital using the four commonly used ICC metrics. We use two ICC metrics

based on the abnormal earnings model of Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005) – the Gode and

Mohanram (2003) implementation of the full model (ICCGM) and a simplified version based on

the price earnings to growth ratio (ICCPEG). We also use two ICC metrics based on the residual

income valuation model – the Gebhardt, Lee and Swaminathan model (ICCGLS) and the Claus

and Thomas model (ICCCT). The details of the empirical execution are presented in Appendix B.

Consistent with the common approach in the literature, we use the average of the ICCs derived

from the four individual methods as our ICC metric. To allow for comparison across time, we

adjust stock returns and ICCs for the risk-free rate.



4. Comparison of the Forecast Accuracy, Bias and ERC of the Models

4.1 Coefficient Estimates of the Three Cross-sectional Models

       Panel A of Table 1 presents the average coefficients and the time-series t-statistics from

the HVZ model estimated each year from 1969 to 2012 using the appropriately lagged ten years

of data. To conserve space, we only report the results for t+1, t+2, and t+3 earnings regressions

(those for t+4 and t+5 regressions are available upon request). The magnitude of the coefficients

and the adjusted R2 are generally consistent with the results in HVZ.

       Panel B of Table 1 presents the average coefficients and the corresponding time-series t-

statistics from the EP model. The magnitude of the coefficient on Et is slightly less than 1, and as

expected, losses are less persistent. The model explains approximately 68.1%, 51.5% and 41.5%

of the variations in EPS in year t+1, t+2, and t+3, respectively. Although the adjusted R2 of the

HVZ model is higher than that of the EP model, this is mainly due to the fact that the HVZ

                                                 11
model is estimated at the dollar level and the inherent heteroskedasticity of the regression boosts

adjusted R2. If the HVZ model is estimated at the per-share level, the adjusted R2 declines to

67.0%, 50.5% and 41.4% (untabulated) for t+1, t+2 and t+3 regressions, respectively.

       Finally, Panel C of Table 1 presents the average coefficients and the corresponding time-

series t-statistics from the RI model. All coefficients have signs consistent with the theoretical

prediction from the residual income valuation model. In addition to the positive coefficient on

earnings and negative coefficient on the loss interaction, the regression has a positive average

coefficient for book value and a negative coefficient for accruals.

       The three cross-sectional models produce non-missing one-, two-, and three-year-ahead

earnings forecasts for 179,362 firm-year observations from 1969 to 2012.



4.2 Forecast Accuracy of the Four Models

       To evaluate the performance of the cross-sectional earnings models, we first compare

their forecast accuracy. We perform the analysis using the sample of firm-year observations with

non-missing t+1, t+2, and t+3 forecast bias for all four models from 1969 to 2008. The time

period ends in 2008 because we require non-missing realized earnings in the future three years to

calculate forecast bias and accuracy. The sample includes 119,653 firm-year observations. Table

2 reports the comparison of forecast accuracy.

       Panel A of Table 2 reports the time-series averages of the mean and median absolute

forecast error for the HVZ, RW, EP, and RI models in the full sample. A larger number indicates

a less accurate earnings forecast. The RI model produces the most accurate forecasts for all three

forecast horizons with the lowest average absolute forecast error. The EP model has the second

best forecast accuracy, while the HVZ model generates the least accurate forecasts among the

                                                 12
four models. For example, the mean absolute forecast error of the RI model is 0.073 (t=15.80)

for one-year-ahead forecasts, while the corresponding mean absolute forecast error of the EP,

RW and HVZ models is 0.073 (t=15.77), 0.088 (t=12.32), and 0.101 (t=15.09), respectively.

Compared to the forecasts of the HVZ model, the forecasts of the RI model are on average 28%

more accurate. At the one-year-ahead forecast horizon, the RI model and the EP model have the

similar forecast accuracy. However, as the forecast horizon increases, the RI model produces

more accurate forecasts than the EP model. For example, the mean three-year-ahead absolute

forecast error is 0.126 (t=20.64) for the RI model and 0.133 (t=17.42) for the EP model, with the

difference significant at 1% level. The corresponding values for the RW and HVZ models are

0.128 (t=20.50) and 0.203 (t=16.42), respectively. At the three-year-ahead forecast horizon, the

RI model generates forecasts that are on average 38% more accurate than the forecasts from the

HVZ model. It is also worth noting that the absolute forecast error of the RW model is on

average 13% to 37% smaller than the HVZ model.

        In terms of the median absolute forecast error, both the RI model and the RW model

produce the most accurate forecasts for all three horizons, with none of the differences between

the two models being statistically significant. The EP model generally underperforms both the RI

model and the RW model in all horizons, expect for one-year-ahead forecast where its accuracy

is indistinguishable from the RW model. Finally, the HVZ model consistently has the worst

forecast accuracy among the four models – its pair-wise differences with the other three models

are all significant at 1% level.

        We also adopt an alternative non-parametric measure to evaluate forecast accuracy.

Specifically, we examine how often each model produces the most and the least accurate

forecast. As the results in Panel B of Table 2 show, the RW model produces 31.2% of the most


                                               13
accurate forecasts for year t+1, 34.3% for year t+2, and 38.3% for year t+3. The HVZ model

ranks the second: 27.8% for t+1, 25.4% for t+2, and 22.5% for t+3. However, both the RW

model and the HVZ model are also more likely to produce the least accurate forecast: the HVZ

(RW) model produces 35.5% (31.1%) of the least accurate forecasts for year t+1, 37.9% (27.9%)

for year t+2, and 38.0% (30.3%) for year t+3. respectively. The results suggest that although the

RI model and the EP model do not always produce the best forecast, the forecast errors from

these two models have less variance than the forecast errors from the HVZ model or the RW

model.

         Panel C of Table 2 reports the time-series averages of the absolute forecast error in the

subsamples partitioned by analyst coverage. A firm is considered as covered by analysts if there

is one FY1 consensus forecast on IBES for year t+1. The results show that the mean absolute

forecast error is much bigger for firms without analyst coverage, consistent with the presumption

that these firms are generally smaller and their earnings are harder to forecast. The EP model and

the RI model continue to outperform the HVZ model in both subsamples and the improvements

are more pronounced in the subsample of firms without analyst coverage. For example, for firms

without analyst coverage, the differences in mean absolute forecast error between the RI model

and the HVZ model are 0.043 (or 29% improvement) for the one-year-ahead forecasts and 0.138

(or 44% improvement) for the three-year-ahead forecasts. For firms with analyst coverage, the

corresponding differences in mean absolute forecast error are 0.005 (or 8% improvement) and

0.015 (or 14% improvement), respectively. The RW model still significantly outperforms the

HVZ model in the subsample of firms without analyst coverage. In the subsample of firms with

analyst coverage, the RW model outperforms the HVZ model for year t+2 and t+3 forecasts.




                                                14
       For the subsample of firms with analyst coverage, researchers have two options to

estimate ICC metrics. First, they could use a model-based approach as in HVZ. Second, they

could correct the predictable biases in the forecasts as Mohanram and Gode (2013) do, who show

that the error correction procedure dramatically improves the performance of ICC metrics.

However, for the subsample of firms without analyst coverage, researchers have to use a model-

based approach to generate forecasts. Hence, model-based earnings forecasts are much more

crucial for firms without analyst coverage. In this important group, the HVZ model significantly

underperforms not only the RI model and the EP model, but also the naïve RW model.

       Panel D of Table 2 reports the time-series averages of the mean absolute forecast error in

the subsamples partitioned by firm size. Each year, observations are sorted into two equal sized

groups based on their end-of-June market value of equity. The results show that in both

subsamples the RI model has the most accurate forecasts. Relative to the HVZ model, the

improvement of the RI model in forecast accuracy is more pronounced in small firms. For

example, in small firms the differences in mean absolute forecast error between the RI model and

the HVZ model are 0.056 (or 34% improvement) for the one-year-ahead forecast and 0.153 (or

45% improvement) for the three-year-ahead forecast. The corresponding differences in the large

firm are 0.000 and 0.002 (or 3% improvement), respectively. The EP model also outperforms the

HVZ model in both subsamples, but the improvements are relatively smaller than those of the RI

model. Finally, the naïve RW model continues to outperform the HVZ model in small firms,

whose earnings are more difficult to forecast.

       In summary, the results in Table 2 show that both the RI model and the EP model

outperform the HVZ model in terms of forecast accuracy. The improvement is more significant

in the groups of firms where model-based forecasts are more relevant and important, i.e., small


                                                 15
firms and firms without analyst coverage. In addition, the HVZ model also significantly

underperforms the naïve random walk model in the full sample as well as in the subsamples of

small firms and firms without analyst coverage.6

4.3 Forecast Bias of the Four Models

        Table 3 reports the comparison of forecast bias of the four models. Forecast bias is the

difference between the actual earnings and the earnings forecasts, scaled by end-of-June market

value of equity (the HVZ and RW models) or end-of-June stock price (the EP and RI models). A

negative bias indicates that the forecast is higher than the actual. Panel A of Table 3 reports the

time-series averages of the mean and median forecast bias for the four models in the full sample

as well as their pair-wise comparisons. Mean forecast biases for the HVZ, EP and RI models are

negative and statistically significant for all forecast horizons. In contrast, mean forecast biases

for the RW model are positive and statistically significant for all forecast horizons. This is

because the naïve random walk model does not allow for growth in earnings. The magnitude of

the forecast bias of the HVZ model is significantly larger than all other models, including the

naïve RW model.

        Panel B of Table 3 reports the time-series averages of the mean forecast bias in the

subsamples partitioned by analyst coverage. The mean forecast bias of the RI model is generally

the smallest in magnitude among all models in both subsamples. However, its one-year-ahead

forecast bias has larger magnitude than the RW model for firms with analyst coverage. In both

subsamples, the HVZ model produces more biased forecast than all other three models.



6
 We further partition our sample into four time periods (1969-1978, 1979-1988, 1989-1998, and 1999-2008). We do
not observe any systematic changes in forecast accuracy of the HVZ, EP and RI models. However, the forecast
accuracy of the RW model deteriorates over time. This is not surprising as the naïve model is not well suited for
more complex operations.

                                                       16
       Panel C of Table 3 reports the time-series averages of the mean forecast bias in the

subsamples partitioned by firm size. For large firms, the mean forecast biases of the EP and RI

models are all statistically insignificant, while the mean forecast biases of the HVZ model are all

significantly negative. For small firms, the mean forecast biases of the HVZ, EP and RI models

are all significantly negative, with the forecasts of the HVZ model being the most biased.

       In summary, the forecasts from the RI model generally are the least biased for the whole

population as well as in the partitions by analyst coverage and by firm size. In contrast, the

forecasts from the HVZ model generally are the most biased, especially for firms without analyst

coverage and small firms.


4.4 ERC of Model-based Forecasts

       A higher ERC suggests that the market reacts more strongly to the unexpected earnings

generated from the model. In other words, the earnings forecasts from the model potentially

represent a better approximation of market expectations. Table 4 reports the time-series averages

of the ERCs for all models. We estimate the ERC by regressing the sum of the quarterly earnings

announcement returns (market-adjusted, from day-1 to day+1) over the next one, two, and three

years on firm-specific unexpected earnings (i.e., the forecast bias) measured over the

corresponding horizon.

       Panel A presents the ERCs for the entire sample. The ERCs for one-, two-, and three-

year-ahead forecasts from the RI model are 0.042 (t=18.02), 0.064 (t=13.83), and 0.085

(t=13.57), respectively, which are the highest among all models. The EP model ranks the second

with the corresponding ERCs of 0.040 (t=19.19), 0.062 (t=14.39), and 0.083 (t=12.90),

respectively. The ERCs of the RI and the EP forecasts are 18% to 85% larger than the ERCs of


                                                17
the HVZ forecasts. Surprisingly, even the naïve RW model outperforms the HVZ model for all

forecast horizons. For example, the ERC of the three-year-ahead forecast is 0.046 (t=7.66) for

the HVZ model and 0.078 (t=12.20) for the RW model, with the difference significant at 1%

level. In addition, the adjusted R-squares of the HVZ model are also significantly lower than

those of the other three models. The evidence indicates that compared to the HVZ forecasts, the

RI and the EP forecasts better represent market expectations.

       Panel B of Table 4 reports the time-series averages of the ERCs in the subsamples

partitioned by analyst coverage. For firms without analyst coverage, the ERCs of the HVZ

forecasts are the lowest among all models for all three forecast horizons, while the ERCs of the

RW, EP and RI forecasts are virtually indistinguishable. For firms with analyst coverage, the

HVZ, EP and RI forecasts produce similar ERCs for all horizons, with none of the pair-wise

differences being statistically significant except for the difference between HVZ and EP in year

t+1 forecast.

       Panel C of Table 4 reports the time-series averages of the ERCs in the subsamples

partitioned by firm size. For small firms, both the EP model and the RI model produce the

highest ERCs, while the HVZ model has the lowest ERCs. In large firms, however, the HVZ

model outperforms the other three models, while the RW model is the second best choice.

       To summarize, the forecasts from the EP and RI models represent a better approximation

of the market expectations than the forecasts from the HVZ model, both in the full sample and in

partitions where model-based forecasts are more important. Furthermore, the forecasts of the

HVZ model underperform the forecasts of the naïve random walk model as proxies for the

market expectations in small firms and in firms without analyst coverage.



                                               18
5. Properties of ICC Estimates from the Models

5.1 Relation with Future Returns: Portfolio Tests

         In each year, we divide the sample into quintiles based on the ICC metrics. We then

compare the equally weighted mean returns to each of the quintiles, focusing on the spreads

between the lowest and the highest quintiles. The returns are measured annually for the first three

years after portfolio formation, with the compounding period starting four months after the end

of the prior fiscal year.7 To allow for a comparison across time, we subtract the risk-free rate (RF)

from both the annual buy-and-hold returns and the ICC metrics.

         Table 5 presents the pooled results of our portfolio tests using annual quintiles. Panel A

presents the returns over the future three years for the quintiles formed on the composite ICC

metric (average of ICCGM, ICCPEG, ICCGLS and ICCCT) for each forecasting model (HVZ, EP and

RI). Panel B reports the pair-wise comparisons of the return spreads between the lowest and the

highest quintiles.

         The first column in Panel A provides the mean ICC for each quintile for each of the

models. As the results indicate, the mean level of ICC is generally higher for the HVZ model,

especially for the higher quintiles. This is potentially related to the higher bias in the HVZ model

reported earlier. The HVZ model is more likely to have negative forecast errors – i.e., more

likely to generate higher forecasts of earnings, which would naturally lead to higher values of

ICC.




7
  This represents a departure from HVZ, who form calendar time portfolios starting on July 1st. The advantage of
our approach is that the financial statement information is equally timely for all observations. The disadvantage is
the fact that the compounding period may not be identical for all firms in our sample. As a robustness test, we carry
out all tests in a subset of firms with December fiscal year ends (over 60% of the sample) and find virtually identical
results.

                                                          19
       The first set of rows in Panel A of Table 5 presents the returns and return spreads for the

HVZ model. Consistent with their reported results, the return spreads for the three years are

economically meaningful and statistically significant (5.49%, 6.66% and 4.49%, respectively).

Further, the realized returns increase monotonically from the lowest ICC quintile to the highest

ICC quintile for all three years.

       The next set of rows of Panel A presents the return spreads for the EP model. As the

results indicate, the EP model generates higher return spreads. For instance, the return spreads

for the EP model are 7.41%, 7.87% and 7.13% for the three years respectively, while the

corresponding spreads for the HVZ model are 5.49%, 6.66% and 4.49%, with the difference in

spreads being statistically significant in year t+1 and year t+3 (see Table 5, Panel B). Thus, the

EP model presents itself as a superior alternative to the HVZ model, consistent with the results

for forecast bias, accuracy and ERC.

       The final set of rows of Panel A of Table 5 presents the return spreads for the RI model,

which are quantitatively similar to those of the EP model. For instance, the RI model produces

return spreads of 8.39%, 7.86%, and 7.02% for the next three years. This compares favorably

with the returns spreads of 5.49%, 6.66% and 4.49% for the HVZ model (differences significant

for year t+1 and year t+3).

       The return spreads for the ICC metrics, especially those from the EP and RI model,

compare favorably with the results shown in prior literature (Gode and Mohanram 2003,

Gebhardt et al. 2001). They are also comparable to the results using adjusted forecasts shown in

Mohanram and Gode (2013).




                                               20
5.2 Relation with Future Returns: Firm Level Tests

        In addition to the portfolio tests, we perform firm level tests to measure the relation

between the ICC metrics generated by the models and future returns. For each year, we estimate

cross-sectional univariate regressions with the future returns as the dependent variable and the

ICC metric as the independent variable.8 The benchmark coefficient is “1”, where the realized

return is on average equal to the ICC proxy. We present the Fama and MacBeth (1973)

coefficients and t-statistics in Table 6. Panel A presents the regression results for the ICC metrics

derived from each of the three models. Panel B compares the coefficients on the ICC metrics

across the models.

        The first set of columns of Panel A presents the regression for year t+1. As the results

indicate, the ICC metric based on the HVZ model has the lowest correlation with future realized

returns with a coefficient of 0.314. In comparison, the ICC metric based on the EP model has a

coefficient of 0.569, while the ICC metric based on the RI model has a coefficient of 0.649. The

next set of columns presents the regressions for year t+2 and suggests a similar pattern, with the

coefficient on ICC for the HVZ model at 0.256 trailing that for the EP model (0.544) and the RI

model (0.579). Finally, the last set of columns suggests that the pattern persists for year t+3. The

coefficient on ICC for the HVZ model is 0.147, while the coefficients on ICC for the EP model

and the RI model are 0.559 and 0.573, respectively.

        As the comparison in Panel B suggests, the differences in the coefficients on ICC

between the HVZ model and the RI model or the EP model are statistically significant for year

t+3. In year t+1 and year t+2, the differences appear to be economically significant. For instance,


8
 Easton and Monahan (2005) recommend running regressions with the ICC measure and proxies for cash flow news
and discount rate news. However, these proxies require forecast revisions, which are not feasible to estimate for
cross-sectional models. Hence, we only run univariate regressions.

                                                       21
the mean coefficients of the RI model or the EP model are more than twice as large as the mean

coefficients of the HVZ model for year t+2. However, the differences are statistically

insignificant. Finally, the ICC based on the RI model appears to have slightly stronger

correlations with future realized returns than the ICC based on the EP model.9

        As an alternative to comparing mean coefficients across different sets of regressions, we

also run a “horse race” between the ICC metrics by regressing realized returns on all three

metrics (labeled ICCHVZ, ICCEP and ICCRI). The results are presented in Panel C of Table 6. As

the results suggest, ICCRI is the clear winner in this "horse race”, with a significant coefficient

that approaches the benchmark of 1 for all three years. The coefficients on ICCHVZ and ICCEP are

insignificant for all three years.

        To summarize, the firm level regressions confirm the results from the portfolio tests. The

ICC estimates derived from the EP model and the RI model show stronger correlations with

realized returns than the ICC estimates from the HVZ model. The RI model appears to perform

marginally better than the EP model. Researchers wishing to choose between these two models

will have to make a tradeoff between the greater parsimony of the EP model and the slightly

stronger results of the RI model.




9
  A potential concern might be that the lower coefficients on the HVZ model in the return regressions might arise
mechanically due to the greater magnitude and greater spread of the ICC estimates generated from the HVZ model.
To account for this, we perform the following sensitivity test. We standardize all the ICC measures each year by
subtracting the minimum and then dividing by the range (maximum – minimum) for ICC using that method in that
year. In other words, we set each ICC = (ICC – min)/(max – min). We then re-estimate the regressions using the
standardized ICC measures. We continue to find the weakest relation between ICC from the HVZ model and future
returns. For instance, for one-year-ahead returns, the average coefficients on ICCHVZ, ICCEP and ICCRI from the
Fama-MacBeth regressions are 0.230, 0.331, and 0.411, respectively. For two-year-ahead returns, the average
coefficients on ICCHVZ, ICCEP and ICCRI are 0.190, 0.360, and 0.342, respectively. For three-year-ahead returns, the
average coefficients on ICCHVZ, ICCEP and ICCRI are 0.120, 0.309, and 0.298, respectively.

                                                        22
5.3 Relation with Risk Factors

        Prior research has evaluated ICC metrics either by evaluating their correlation with

realized returns or by analyzing their correlation with risk proxies such as systematic risk,

idiosyncratic risk, size, book-to-market, and growth (Gebhardt, Lee and Swaminathan 2001;

Gode and Mohanram 2003; Botosan and Plumlee 2005).10 Our results thus far have shown that

the ICC metrics from the EP and RI models outperform the ICC metrics from the HVZ model as

far as the correlation with realized returns is concerned. We now examine the correlation of the

ICC metrics with risk factors to ensure that this superior performance is not coming at the

expense of anomalous correlations with risk factors.

        We use the following risk factors from prior research: (1) Systematic risk (), calculated

using monthly returns over the lagged five years (ensuring that at least 24 observations are

available); (2) Firm size (LMCAP), the logarithm of market capitalization at the time of the

forecasts; (3) Book-to-market ratio (BM); (4) Idiosyncratic risk (IDIO), the standard deviation of

the prior year’s monthly returns; (5) Earnings volatility (STDNI), the standard deviation of net

income (IBQ) scaled by total assets (ATQ) measured over the previous eight quarters; (6)

Leverage (D2A), the ratio of total debt (DLTT+DLC) to total assets (AT); and (7) Analyst

following (LFOLLOW), the logarithm of 1+number of analysts following the stock. We expect

ICC to be positively related to BM, IDIO, STDNI and D2A, and negatively related to LMCAP

and LFOLLOW.

        We estimate three specifications – the first with only like the CAPM modelthe second

with  augmented with size (LMCAP) and book-to-market (BM) like the Fama and French

10
  Easton and Monahan (2010) argue that the latter approach is logically inconsistent as ICC metrics are estimated
precisely because of the flaws in conventional measures of risk that often rely on ex-post returns. We present these
results to ensure a comparison between our results and those presented in HVZ.

                                                        23
(1992) model, and the final specification with all the proposed risk factors. Regressions are

estimated annually and aggregated using the Fama and MacBeth (1973) procedure.

       The results are presented in Table 7. At the outset, we note that all proxies correlate

strongly in the expected direction with four of the above seven factors – positively as expected

with book-to-market (BM), earnings volatility (STDNI), and leverage (D2A) and negatively as

expected with size (LMCAP). Our discussion will hence focus on the three remaining risk

proxies, , IDIO, and LFOLLOW, where we find variations among the three forecasting models.

       The first set of rows in Table 7 present the regressions for the ICC metric computed from

the HVZ model. The results suggest an anomalous negative correlation between ICCHVZ and  in

all specifications, and an insignificant correlation with both idiosyncratic risk (IDIO) as well as

analyst following (LFOLLOW).

       The next set of rows presents the results for the EP model. In the univariate regression,

the coefficient on is positive and statistically significant (0.003, t-stat 1.71). In the full

specification, we find a strong positive correlation as hypothesized between ICCEP and IDIO

(0.222, t-stat 9.26) and a significant negative correlation as hypothesized between ICCEP and

LFOLLOW (-0.001, t-stat -2.03). However, the coefficient on  in the full specification is

anomalously negative (-0.008, t-stat -7.00).

       Finally, the last set of rows presents the results for the RI model. The coefficient on is

insignificant in the univariate regression (-0.001, t-stat -0.70). In the full specification, we find a

strong positive coefficient on IDIO (0.115, t-stat 5.10) but an insignificant positive coefficient on

LFOLLOW (0.000, t-stat 1.48). Similar to the other two measures, the coefficient on  in the

full specification is anomalously negative (-0.007, t-stat -6.09).


                                                  24
       To summarize, the EP model shows the strongest correlations with risk factors, with six

of the seven risk factors (all except ) loading significantly and in the correct direction. The RI

model ranks the second best, with five of the seven risk factors (all except  and LFOLLOW)

loading significantly and in the correct direction. For the HVZ model, three risk factors either do

not load or load anomalously (, LFOLLOW and IDIO). The risk regressions hence confirm that

the superior performance of the RI model and the EP model in particular is not coming at the

expense of anomalous correlations with risk factors.



6. Sensitivity Analysis

       We perform several sensitivity tests to verify the robustness of our results. These results

are not tabulated for brevity, but are discussed below.

       The relation between our prediction variables and future earnings could vary not only

through time but also across industries. We examine this possibility by estimating regressions by

industry and by year, where industry is defined according to the 48 industry classifications in

Fama and French (1997). Interestingly, we find that estimating the regressions at the industry-

year level actually increase forecast errors for all models. In addition, estimating regressions by

industry-year slightly reduces our sample size because certain industries do not have sufficient

historical data. Hence, it appears that the parsimonious approach used here as well as in the HVZ

paper is preferable.

       The evidence in the paper indicates that firm size is an important determinant of the

relation between our prediction variables and future earnings. Consequently, we estimate each

model by size deciles and year. The size deciles are determined using the end-of-June market

value of equity each year. This modification marginally improves the forecast accuracy of all

                                                25
models but has almost no impact on the performance of the ICC metrics. This confirms the

validity of the parsimonious approach of running annual cross-sectional regression for the entire

population.

       One concern that may affect the comparison of the HVZ model with our models,

especially the EP and RI models, is that the HVZ model is estimated at the dollar level, while the

EP and RI models are estimated at the per-share level. We perform robustness test by estimating

the HVZ model at the per-share level. We find that the per-share estimation improves HVZ’s

forecast accuracy and ERC. However, the per-share HVZ model still significantly underperforms

the RW, EP and RI models in terms of forecast accuracy and ERC performance. For example,

the one-year-ahead to three-year-ahead earnings forecasts for the whole Compustat population

from the RI model are on average 6% to 15% more accurate than the forecasts from the per-share

HVZ model. The improvement can be as large as 20% for firms without analyst coverage or for

small firms. In addition, we also estimate all models by scaling the variables by total assets or

market capitalization, and the inference does not change. Hence, the superiority of the EP model

and the RI model is not an artifact of the differences in scaling.

       The RW model does not have intercept, which may potentially drive the differences in

forecast accuracy between the RW model and the other three models. To address this issue, we

estimate the HVZ, RI and EP models without intercept. This method actually improves the

forecast accuracy for all three models. As a result, the EP model not only outperforms the RW

model in mean forecast accuracy but also reports comparable median forecast accuracy as the

RW model. However, the ranking of the four models in terms of forecast accuracy does not

change.




                                                 26
       We also explore the non-regression based forecasts. Specifically, we examine the

following methods: 1) Multiply price with the most current EPS yield (earnings/price) for the

market or the industry; 2) Multiply earnings with expected GNP growth; 3) Multiply book value

of equity with the current ROE for the market (or industry); 4) various weighted average of the

first three alternatives. We find that none of these non-regression based forecasts outperform the

EP or the RI forecasts. Among these four alternatives, the method using only EPS yield produces

the most accurate forecast.

       We also use the robust regression technique instead of OLS regression to reduce the

impact of outliers on regression coefficients. Robust regression is an iterative procedure that

keeps eliminating outliers and re-estimating regressions, until no further outliers are deleted. We

find that the robust regression technique marginally improves the mean forecast accuracy of all

models. However, the rankings of the models in terms of forecast accuracy and ERC do not

change. Further, we find a minimal impact on the properties of the ICC metrics. Again, for

reasons of parsimony, we recommend that researchers use a simple OLS regression.

       A potential problem with the ERC estimation is that the magnitude of ERCs is biased

downward in the presence of large forecast errors. Cheong and Thomas (2012) show that ERCs

can increase dramatically when observations with extreme forecast errors are deleted. To

mitigate the concern that our results of ERC comparison could be driven by the outliers in

forecast errors, we truncate at 1%, 5% and 10% on each side of the forecast error distribution for

each forecast model. The magnitude of the ERC estimates for all four models increases after

eliminating the outliers. However, the ranking of the ERCs does not change. In fact, the

significance of the differences between the ERCs actually increases.




                                                27
7. Conclusions

       Forecasts of future earnings are critical for empirical research in valuation, especially

research using implied cost of capital (ICC). Prior research has traditionally used forecasts from

analysts, which has restricted the analysis to the subset of covered firms. As a result, the most

interesting firms are often omitted from the analysis. Using time series models to generate

forecasts does not satisfactorily address this problem, because these models impose substantial

survivorship and age requirements. A recent paper by Hou, van Dijk and Zhang (2012) addresses

this problem by using a cross-sectional approach that only requires current information from

firms to generate forecasts. Not surprisingly, the HVZ model has been used in recent research on

accounting based valuation (Chang, Landsman and Monahan 2012) and ICC (e.g., Jones and

Tuzel 2012; Lee, So and Wang 2011; Patatoukas 2011).

       Given the widespread adoption of the HVZ model to generate forecasts in lieu of analyst

forecasts, it is crucial to evaluate the HVZ model and present alternatives to address its

weaknesses. Gerakos and Gramacy (2013) show that the HVZ model performs worse than a

naïve random walk model. However, a random walk model is not practical for computing ICC.

       In this paper, we present and evaluate two alternatives to the HVZ model, while adopting

the cross-sectional forecasting approach in HVZ. Our first model (EP) is a simple earnings

persistence model which allows for differential persistence of profits and losses. The second

model (RI) is motivated by the residual income valuation model in Feltham and Ohlson (1996),

and forecasts future income as a function of current income, current book value of equity and

accruals. We test the HVZ model, the above two models and the naïve random walk (RW) model

on the basis of their forecast bias, accuracy and earnings response coefficients (ERCs). We also



                                               28
evaluate the ICC estimates generated from the HVZ, EP and RI models on the basis of their

correlations with future returns and risk factors.

       We find that both of our models significantly outperform the HVZ model in virtually all

the dimensions we examine. Both the EP model and the RI model generate forecasts that are

more accurate and show greater ERCs. These differences are greater in settings where model-

based forecasts are likely to be the most useful – for small firms and for firms without analyst

coverage. In contrast, the HVZ model performs worse than a naïve random walk model,

confirming the results in Gerakos and Gramacy (2013).

       In addition, the ICC proxies generated from the EP model and the RI model show

stronger correlations with future returns than the ICC proxies generated from the HVZ model,

both at the portfolio level and at the firm level. Lastly, the ICC metrics from the EP model and

the RI model also show more meaningful correlations with suggested risk factors.

       An interesting question to ponder is why the forecasts from the EP and RI model perform

better than the forecasts from the HVZ model. One conjecture that can be made is that the EP

and RI model rely on financial statement numbers directly such as earnings, book values and

accruals, while the HVZ model relies instead on numbers recast in terms of cash flows and

dividends. This is potentially analogous to the results in Dechow (1994) who shows that earnings

have a much strong correlation with future earnings and returns than cash flows do.

       The results of our paper have crucial implications for all research where proxies for

future expected earnings are required. We recommend that researchers use cross-sectional

forecasting models based either on the EP model or the RI model presented in this paper.




                                                 29
References

Abarbanell, J. and B. Bushee. 1997. Fundamental Analysis, Future Earnings and Stock Prices.
      Journal of Accounting Research 35: 1-24.
Botosan, C. and M. Plumlee. 2005. Assessing Alternative Proxies for the Expected Risk
      Premium. The Accounting Review 80: 21–53.
Chang, W., Landsman, W. and S. Monahan. 2012. Selecting an Accounting Based Valuation
      Model. Working paper, INSEAD/University of North Carolina.
Cheong, F. and J. Thomas. 2012. Managerial smoothing of analysts’ EPS forecast errors:
      explanations and implications. Working paper, Rutgers University/ Yale University.
Claus, J., and J. Thomas. 2001. Equity Risk Premium as Low as Three Percent? Evidence From
       Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts for Domestic and International Stocks. Journal of Finance
       56: 1629–1666.
Dechow. P. 1994. Accounting earnings and cash flows as measures of firm performance: The
      role of accounting accruals. Journal of Accounting and Economics 18: 3-42.
Easton, P. 2004. PE Ratios, PEG Ratios, and Estimating the Implied Expected Rate of Return
       on Equity Capital. The Accounting Review 79: 73–96.
_________ and S. Monahan. 2005. An Evaluation of Accounting-Based Measures of Expected
      Returns. The Accounting Review 80: 501–38.
_________ and ________. 2010. Evaluating Accounting-based Measures of Expected Returns:
      Easton and Monahan and Botosan and Plumlee Redux. Working paper, University of
      Notre Dame/INSEAD.
Edwards, E. and P. Bell. 1961. The Theory of and Measurement of Business Income. University
      of California Press.
Elton, J. 1999. Expected Return, Realized Return, and Asset Pricing Tests. Journal of Finance
        54: 1199–1220.
Fama, E. and K. French. 1992. The Cross-section of Expected Stock Returns. Journal of Finance
      47: 427-465.
_________ and ________. 1997. Industry Costs of Equity. Journal of Financial Economics 43:
      153-193.
_________ and ________. 2000. Forecasting Profitability and Earnings. Journal of Business 73:
      161-175.
_________ and ________. 2006. Profitability, Investment and Average Returns. Journal of
      Financial Economics 82: 491-518.
________ and J. MacBeth. 1973. Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests. Journal of
      Political Economy 71: 607-636.
Feltham, G. and J. Ohlson. 1995. Valuation and Clean Surplus Accounting for Operating and
       Financial Activities. Contemporary Accounting Research 11 (Spring): 689–732.



                                             30
——— and ———. 1996. Uncertainty Resolution and the Theory of Depreciation Measurement.
   Journal of Accounting Research 34: 209–234.
Frankel R., and C. Lee, 1998, Accounting Valuation, Market Expectation, and Cross-Sectional
       Returns. Journal of Accounting and Economics 25: 283-319.
Gebhardt, W., Lee, C. and B. Swaminathan. 2001. Towards an Implied Cost of Equity. Journal
      of Accounting Research 39: 135-176.
Gerakos, J. and R. Gramacy. 2013. Regression-based Earnings Forecasts. Working paper,
      University of Chicago.
Gode, D. and P. Mohanram. 2003. Inferring the Cost of equity Using the Ohlson-Juettner Model.
      Review of Accounting Studies 8: 399-431.
Hou, K., van Dijk, M., and Y. Zhang. 2012. The Implied Cost of Equity: A New Approach.
      Journal of Accounting and Economics 53: 504-526.
Hou, K. and D. Robinson. 2006. Industry Concentration and Average Stock Returns. Journal of
      Finance 61: 1927–1956.
Hou, K. and M. van Dijk. 2011. Profitability Shocks and the Size Effect in the Cross-section of
      Expected Stock Returns. Working Paper - Ohio State University.
Jones, C. and S. Tuzel . 2012. Inventory Investment and the Cost of Capital. Journal of Financial
       Economics 107 (3): 557–579.
Lee, C., So, E. and C. Wang. 2011. Evaluating Implied Cost of Capital Estimates. Working
       paper, Stanford University.
Li, K. 2011. How Well Do Investors Understand Loss Persistence? Review of Accounting
       Studies 16: 630-667.
Mohanram, P. and D. Gode. 2013. Removing Predictable Analyst Forecast Errors to Improve
     Implied Cost of Equity Estimates. Review of Accounting Studies 18: 443-478.
Miller, M. and F. Modigliani. 1961. Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of Shares.
        Journal of Business 34: 235-264.
Ohlson, J. 1995. Earnings, Book Values, and Dividends in Equity Valuation. Contemporary
      Accounting Research 11: 661-687.
Ohlson, J. and B. Juettner-Nauroth. 2005. Expected EPS and EPS Growth as Determinants of
      Value. Review of Accounting Studies 10: 349-365.
Patatoukas, P. 2011. Customer-Base Concentration: Implications for Firm Performance and
       Capital Markets. The Accounting Review 87(2): 363-392.
Peasnell, K. 1982. Some Formal Connections between Economic Values and Yields, and
       Accounting Numbers. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 9: 361-381.
Preinreich, G. 1936. The Fair Value and Yield of Common Stock. The Accounting Review 11:
       130-140.
Richardson, S, Sloan, R., Soliman, M. and I. Tuna, 2005. Accrual Reliability, Earnings
       Persistence and Stock Prices. Journal of Accounting and Economics 39: 437-485.


                                               31
Appendix A: Variable definitions for models used to generate forecasts

HVZ model:
Ei ,t    0  1 Ai ,t   2 Di ,t   3 DDi ,t   4 Ei ,t   5 NegEi ,t   6 ACi ,t   i ,t 
Variable        Definition                                                                       Xpressfeed variable
Et+τ            Earnings in year t+τ                                                             ib-spi
At              Total asset in year t                                                            at
Dt              Common dividend                                                                  dvc
DDt             A dummy variable that equals 1 for dividend payers and 0
                otherwise
NegEt           A dummy variable that equals 1 for firms with negative earnings
                and 0 otherwise.
ACt             Change in non-cash current assets less change in current                         Δ(act-che)- Δ(lct-dlc-
                liabilities excluding change in short-term debt and change in                    txp)-dp
                taxes payable minus depreciation and amortization

EP model:
Ei ,t    0  1 NegEi ,t   2 Ei ,t  3 NegE * Ei ,t   i ,t 
Variable        Definition                                                                       Xpressfeed variable
Et+τ            Earnings in year t+τ divided by number of shares outstanding in                  (ib-spi)t+τ/cshot
                year t
NegEt           A dummy variable that equals 1 for firms with negative earnings
                and 0 otherwise.
NegE*Et         Interaction term of NegE and E

RI model:
Ei ,t    0  1 NegEi ,t   2 Ei ,t  3 NegE * Ei ,t   4 Bi ,t   5TACCi ,t   i ,t 
Variable        Definition                                                                       Xpressfeed variable
Et+τ            Earnings in year t+τ divided by number of shares outstanding in                  (ib-spi)t+τ/cshot
                year t
NegEt           A dummy variable that equals 1 for firms with negative earnings
                and 0 otherwise.
NegE*Et         Interaction term of NegE and E
Bt              Book value of equity divided by number of shares outstanding                     ceqt/cshot
TACCt           Richardson et al. (2005) total accruals, i.e., the sum of the                    WC=(act-che)-(lct-
                change in WC, the change in NCO, and the change in FIN,                          dlc);
                divided by number of shares outstanding                                          NCO=(at-act-ivao)-(lt-
                                                                                                 lct-dltt);
                                                                                                 FIN=(ivst+ivao)-
                                                                                                 (dltt+dlc+pstk);
                                                                                                 All variables deflated
                                                                                                 by csho




                                                             32
Appendix B: Computing implied cost of capital

        The implied cost of equity used in this paper is computed as the average of the four commonly
used metrics, ICCGM, ICCPEG, ICCGLS and ICCCT. We briefly describe how these four metrics are
computed below.

ICC based on the OJ Model: ICCGM and ICCPEG

        Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005) show that the implied cost of capital can be expressed as:


                             g 2  (  1)  where A  1  (  1)  dps1  and g 2  (eps2  eps1 ) .
                       eps1
    re  A  A 
              2

                        P0                              2              P0                  eps1

        Gode and Mohanram (2003) make the following assumptions. They set (-1) to rf - 3% where rf is
the risk free rate. In addition, they use the average of short term growth and analysts’ long term growth
rate (LTG) instead of g2 to reduce the impact of outliers.

                                 eps2                                                 eps 5
        If short term growth (         1 ) is greater than long term growth rate ( 4        1 ), we set g2
                                 eps1                                                 eps1
to equal the geometric mean of short term and long term growth rate. If short term growth is less than
long term growth, we set g2 to equal the long term growth rate. Dividends are estimated by calculating
current payout for all firms, defined as dividends (DVC) divided by income before extraordinary items
(IB) for firms with positive current earnings or dividends divided by 6% of total assets (AT) for firms
with negative IB.

        In addition, we compute an ICC from a simplified version of the OJ model that ignores dividends
and sets ICC to the square root of the inverse of the PEG ratio. We compute ICCPEG as:

                                    g2
                ICCPEG =                      where g2 is defined as it is for the RGM model
                              PRICE     
                                        
                                    eps1


ICC based on the RI Model: ICCGLS and ICCCT

        Gebhardt, Lee and Swaminathan (2001) use the residual income valuation model (RI) to estimate
implied cost of equity. They use EPS estimates for future two years and the expected dividends payout
(from historical data) to derive book value and return on equity (ROE) forecasts. Beyond the forecast
horizon, they assume that ROE fades to the industry median by year 12. Industry Median ROE is
estimated as the median of all ROEs from firms in the same industry defined using the Fama and French
(1997) classification over the past five years with positive earnings and non-negative book values, where

                                                     33
ROE is defined as the ratio of net income before extraordinary items (IB) to lagged total common
shareholders’ equity (CEQ). Abnormal earnings are assumed to remain constant at year 12 levels for
perpetuity. The cost of equity is computed numerically by equating current stock price to the sum of the
current book value and the present value of future residual earnings – i.e. solving for r in the equation:
                                              12
                                                  (eps  r * B 1 )       (eps12  r * B11 )
                             P0  Bo                                  
                                              1     (1  r )                r (1  r )12
where eps is the forecasted eps (obtained either from explicit forecast or inferred from expected ROE and
lagged book value), P0 is current price per share, B0 is current book value per share and B1 through B11 are
expected future book values per share obtained through the clean surplus relation, setting payout to equal
current payout. Current payout is defined as dividends (DVC) divided by income before extraordinary
items (IB) for firms with positive current earnings or dividends divided by 6% of total assets (AT) for
firms with negative IB. We depart from GLS by using the model forecasts explicitly for years 1 through 5
and then applying ROE convergence.

         Claus and Thomas (2001) also use the RI model to estimate the implied cost of equity. They
assume that earnings grow at the analyst’s consensus long-term growth rate until year 5, and at the rate of
inflation thereafter. The implied cost of equity is estimated numerically by solving the following equation:
                                         5
                                             (eps  r * B 1 )        (eps5  r * B4 ) * (1  g )
                         P0  Bo                                 
                                         1     (1  r )                  (r  g )(1  r )5
where eps0 through eps5 are the forecasted future earnings per share, B0 is current book value per share
and B1 through B4 are expected future book values per share. Consistent with Claus and Thomas (2001), g
is set to rf – 3%.




                                                        34
Table 1 Coefficient estimates from the three cross-sectional earnings models, 1969 - 2012.
Panel A: The HVZ Model

        Intercept       At             Dt          DDt           Et          NegEt           ACt        Adj. R2
 Et+1    0.3462       0.0018        0.2109        1.3629       0.8715        1.2460       -0.0405       89.6%
         (3.73)       (11.88)       (11.05)       (6.38)       (84.03)       (5.08)        (-6.37)
 Et+2    0.9587       0.0034        0.2937        2.2667       0.8365        2.4850       -0.0549        84.0%
         (8.38)       (11.83)        (8.32)       (6.58)       (46.48)       (7.60)        (-5.01)
 Et+3    2.2031       0.0051        0.3149        2.6674       0.8378        2.5332       -0.0585        80.1%
         (8.92)       (10.34)        (5.33)       (8.79)       (29.11)       (7.46)        (-4.39)

Panel B: The EP Model

          Intercept     NegEt          Et        NegE*Et       Adj. R2
 Et+1      0.1495      -0.1229       0.9614      -0.7096       68.1%
           (13.02)     (-4.58)      (204.78)     (-19.77)
 Et+2      0.2873      -0.1717       0.9846      -1.1451        51.5%
           (11.23)     (-5.88)      (154.65)     (-17.03)
 Et+3      0.4498      -0.2125       0.9992      -1.4155        41.5%
           (11.24)     (-5.31)      (118.66)     (-19.97)

Panel C: The RI Model

        Intercept      NegEt           Et        NegE*Et         Bt           TACCt        Adj. R2
 Et+1    0.0914       -0.1087        0.8649      -0.5436       0.0167        -0.0034       68.1%
         (6.04)        (-3.98)      (109.26)     (-15.26)      (15.66)        (-2.28)
 Et+2    0.1855       -0.1475        0.8280      -0.8601       0.0294        -0.0217       52.1%
         (6.83)       (-4.78)        (86.93)     (-11.91)      (20.70)       (-10.07)
 Et+3    0.2993       -0.2518        0.8105      -1.3241       0.0409        -0.0413       42.5%
         (7.59)        (-5.51)       (69.57)      (-6.54)      (21.94)       (-13.38)
Each model is estimated annually from 1969 to 2012 using previous ten years of data. The average coefficients and
the time-series t-statistics (in parentheses) are reported for the HVZ model (Panel A), the EP model (Panel B), and
the RI model (Panel C). Appendix A provides the definitions of the variables in each model.




                                                        35
Table 2 Absolute forecast error of the cross-sectional earnings models and the random walk
model
Panel A: Full sample of 119,653 firm-year observations (1969-2008)
                                Et+1                                Et+2                                 Et+3
                     Mean              Median             Mean             Median              Mean             Median
 HVZ                0.101***           0.034***          0.151***          0.057***           0.203***          0.079***
                    (15.09)            (14.83)           (15.59)           (16.75)            (16.42)           (17.86)
 RW                 0.088***           0.028***          0.102***          0.043***           0.128***          0.056***
                    (12.32)            (22.96)           (18.11)           (26.33)            (20.50)           (23.32)
 EP                 0.073***           0.028***          0.101***          0.045***           0.133***          0.061***
                    (15.77)            (21.61)           (18.95)           (22.04)            (17.42)           (19.71)
 RI                 0.073***           0.027***          0.099***          0.044***           0.126***          0.059***
                    (15.80)            (22.58)           (20.55)           (23.81)            (20.64)           (21.38)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW             0.013**            0.006***          0.049***          0.014***           0.075***          0.023***
                     (2.14)             (3.97)            (6.14)            (6.47)             (7.46)            (8.66)
 HVZ-EP             0.028***           0.006***          0.050***          0.012***           0.070***          0.018***
                     (6.36)             (4.04)            (7.00)            (5.43)             (7.20)            (6.37)
 HVZ-RI             0.028***           0.007***          0.052***          0.013***           0.077***          0.020***
                     (6.21)             (4.23)            (7.22)            (5.79)             (8.16)            (7.41)
 RW-EP              0.015***            0.000             0.001            -0.002**            -0.005           -0.005**
                     (3.91)             (0.40)            (0.23)            (-2.32)           (-0.85)            (-2.23)
 RW-RI              0.015***            0.001             0.003             -0.001             0.002             -0.003
                     (4.10)             (0.43)            (1.19)            (-1.65)            (0.37)            (-1.42)
 EP-RI               0.000             0.001***          0.002**           0.001***           0.007***          0.002***
                     (0.29)             (3.53)            (2.17)            (3.57)             (3.42)            (4.20)

Panel B: Non-parametric test of forecast accuracy for the full sample
                             Most accurate forecast                                    Least accurate forecast
                      Et+1              Et+2          Et+3                      Et+1            Et+2              Et+3
 HVZ                 0.278             0.254      0.225                         0.355          0.379             0.380

 RW                  0.312             0.343      0.383                         0.311          0.279             0.303

 EP                  0.212             0.208      0.203                         0.165          0.189             0.191

 RI                  0.198             0.194      0.189                         0.168          0.152             0.126




                                                         36
Table 2 continued
Panel C: Partition analysis of mean absolute forecast error by analyst coverage
                               No coverage (N=50,242)                        With coverage (N=69,411)
                        Et+1             Et+2           Et+3            Et+1            Et+2          Et+3
 HVZ                  0.149***        0.227***       0.315***         0.062***       0.085***       0.107***
                      (14.28)          (16.05)        (16.58)         (11.69)         (16.49)       (22.14)
                            ***              ***
 RW                   0.124           0.144          0.177***         0.078 ***
                                                                                     0.083  ***
                                                                                                    0.101***
                      (10.63)          (12.75)        (14.34)          (9.50)         (14.68)       (17.54)
 EP                   0.105***        0.141***       0.189***         0.057***       0.075***       0.094***
                      (12.77)          (15.91)        (14.57)         (13.58)         (20.74)       (28.24)
 RI                   0.106***        0.138***       0.177***         0.057***       0.074***       0.092***
                      (12.47)          (15.90)        (16.94)         (13.43)         (20.11)       (28.56)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW               0.025***        0.083***        0.138***        -0.016***        0.002          0.006**
                       (4.23)          (9.26)         (11.30)          (-5.07)         (1.42)          (2.17)
 HVZ-EP               0.044***        0.086***        0.126***         0.005***       0.010***        0.013***
                       (9.62)         (10.34)          (9.81)           (4.09)         (5.11)          (5.70)
 HVZ-RI               0.043***        0.089***        0.138***         0.005***       0.011***        0.015***
                       (9.22)         (11.05)         (11.81)           (4.33)         (6.01)          (6.93)
 RW-EP                0.019***         0.003           -0.012         0.021***        0.008**          0.007*
                       (3.23)          (0.41)         (-0.98)           (4.98)         (2.63)          (2.05)
 RW-RI                0.018***         0.006           0.000          0.021***        0.009***        0.009**
                       (3.10)          (0.97)          (0.04)           (5.08)         (3.09)          (2.70)
 EP-RI                 -0.001          0.003          0.012**           0.000         0.001**         0.002***
                      (-1.51)          (1.15)          (2.70)           (0.62)         (2.13)          (5.11)

Panel D: Partition analysis of mean absolute forecast error by size
                                Small firms (N=59,819)                          Large firms (N=59,834)
                        Et+1              Et+2           Et+3           Et+1              Et+2           Et+3
 HVZ                  0.167***          0.251***       0.339***       0.035***          0.052***       0.067***
                      (14.01)           (14.03)        (14.81)        (20.75)           (26.10)        (26.14)
 RW                   0.135***          0.151***       0.187***       0.041***          0.053***       0.069***
                      (11.14)           (15.32)        (17.24)        (17.32)           (27.31)        (27.21)
                            ***               ***
 EP                   0.112             0.151          0.200***       0.035 ***
                                                                                        0.052 ***
                                                                                                       0.066***
                      (14.25)           (17.01)        (15.40)        (22.05)           (25.74)        (24.98)
 RI                   0.111***          0.146***       0.186***       0.035***          0.051***       0.065***
                      (14.18)           (18.45)        (18.69)        (22.27)           (26.23)        (25.54)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW               0.032***        0.100***        0.152***        -0.006***        -0.001          -0.002
                       (2.85)          (6.24)          (7.54)          (-5.41)        (-1.13)         (-1.43)
 HVZ-EP               0.055***        0.100***        0.139***          0.000           0.000           0.001
                       (6.49)          (7.09)          (7.29)          (0.24)          (0.43)          (0.70)
 HVZ-RI               0.056***        0.105***        0.153***          0.000           0.001         0.002**
                       (6.32)          (7.26)          (8.17)          (0.11)          (1.12)          (2.07)
 RW-EP                0.023***         0.000           -0.013         0.006***         0.001           0.003*
                       (3.57)          (0.10)         (-1.09)          (5.14)          (1.40)          (1.81)
 RW-RI                0.024***         0.005           0.001          0.006***         0.002*         0.004***
                       (3.78)          (1.04)          (0.05)          (5.11)          (1.95)          (2.79)
 EP-RI                 0.001          0.005**         0.014***          0.000         0.001***        0.001***
                       (0.35)          (2.07)          (3.29)          (0.98)          (3.77)          (5.49)

                                                        37
Table 2 continued
Panel A reports the time-series averages of the mean and median absolute forecast error for the three cross-sectional
earnings models and the random walk model, and their pair-wise comparisons. The time-series t-statistics are
reported in the parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, respectively. Absolute
forecast error is the absolute value of forecast bias, which is the difference between actual earnings and model-based
earnings forecasts scaled by the end-of-June market value of equity (HVZ and RW) or by the end-of-June stock
price (EP and RI). The results are based on the sample of 119,653 firm-year observations with non-missing t+1, t+2,
and t+3 forecast bias from all models. Panel B reports the non-parametric test of forecast accuracy. The numbers
represent the proportion of observations for which each model produces the most and least accurate forecast. Panel
C reports mean absolute forecast error by partition of analyst coverage. A firm is covered by analysts if there is one
FY1 consensus forecast on IBES for year t+1. Panel D reports mean absolute forecast error by partition of firm size.
Each year, observations are sorted into two equal sized groups based on their end-of-June market value of equity.




                                                         38
Table 3 Forecast bias of the cross-sectional earnings models and the random walk model
Panel A: Full sample of 119,653 firm-year observations (1969-2008)
                                Et+1                              Et+2                             Et+3
                      Mean              Median          Mean              Median         Mean              Median
 HVZ                -0.056***          -0.013***      -0.092***          -0.027***     -0.133***          -0.043***
                     (-7.86)            (-4.82)        (-8.33)            (-6.68)       (-9.72)            (-8.37)
 RW                  0.007**            0.008***      0.027***           0.015***       0.040***          0.022***
                     (2.20)              (7.34)        (5.76)             (7.38)         (6.15)            (7.10)
 EP                 -0.020***            0.000        -0.032***          -0.006**      -0.052***          -0.015***
                     (-5.27)             (0.13)        (-5.19)            (-2.17)       (-5.66)            (-3.75)
 RI                 -0.013***            0.002        -0.019***           -0.003       -0.034***          -0.010***
                     (-3.50)             (1.32)        (-3.55)            (-1.18)       (-4.40)            (-2.80)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW             -0.063***          -0.021***      -0.119***          -0.042***     -0.173***          -0.065***
                     (-9.35)            (-7.27)       (-10.42)            (-9.14)      (-11.36)           (-10.23)
 HVZ-EP             -0.036***          -0.013***      -0.060***          -0.021***     -0.081***          -0.028***
                     (-6.49)            (-6.53)        (-6.60)            (-7.13)       (-6.53)            (-6.90)
 HVZ-RI             -0.043***          -0.015***      -0.073***          -0.024***     -0.099***          -0.033***
                     (-7.62)            (-7.00)        (-7.92)            (-7.67)       (-8.16)            (-7.69)
 RW-EP               0.027***          0.008***       0.059***           0.021***      0.092***           0.037***
                     (10.48)            (6.96)         (11.30)            (8.99)        (11.27)            (10.53)
 RW-RI               0.020***          0.006***       0.046***           0.018***      0.074***           0.032***
                      (8.01)            (6.05)         (10.60)            (8.76)        (11.16)            (10.46)
 EP-RI              -0.007***          -0.002***      -0.013***          -0.003***     -0.018***          -0.005***
                     (-8.26)            (-8.46)        (-8.17)            (-6.76)       (-7.91)            (-7.50)

Panel B: Partition analysis of mean forecast bias by analyst coverage
                               No coverage (N=50,242)                        With coverage (N=69,411)
                        Et+1             Et+2           Et+3           Et+1             Et+2           Et+3
 HVZ                 -0.085***        -0.153***      -0.239***      -0.018***        -0.023***     -0.032***
                      (-9.06)         (-11.42)       (-13.07)        (-4.69)          (-4.49)        (-5.21)
                            ***              ***            ***                             ***
 RW                   0.015           0.042           0.050           0.000          0.014          0.024***
                       (3.22)           (5.57)         (5.41)         (0.01)           (2.99)         (3.89)
 EP                  -0.021***        -0.043***      -0.086***      -0.016***        -0.018***     -0.025***
                      (-4.27)          (-4.85)        (-5.77)        (-4.86)          (-4.42)        (-5.08)
                                              **             ***            ***              ***
 RI                    -0.005         -0.017         -0.048         -0.013           -0.014        -0.019***
                      (-0.96)          (-2.10)        (-4.13)        (-4.24)          (-3.46)        (-3.82)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW              -0.100***        -0.195***      -0.289***      -0.018***        -0.037***     -0.056***
                     (-11.35)         (-13.80)       (-15.25)       (-13.21)         (-14.08)       (-14.11)
 HVZ-EP              -0.064***        -0.110***      -0.153***       -0.002*          -0.005*        -0.007*
                      (-8.08)          (-9.46)        (-9.75)        (-1.71)          (-2.02)        (-1.95)
 HVZ-RI              -0.080***        -0.136***      -0.191***      -0.005***        -0.009***     -0.013***
                      (-8.72)         (-10.48)       (-11.51)        (-3.26)          (-3.68)        (-3.70)
 RW-EP                0.036***        0.085***        0.136***      0.016***         0.032***       0.049***
                       (9.14)          (10.61)         (9.98)         (8.81)          (10.25)       (11.02)
                            ***              ***            ***            ***              ***            ***
 RW-RI                0.020           0.059           0.098         0.013            0.028          0.043
                       (5.21)           (9.81)        (10.28)         (7.88)           (9.39)       (10.29)
 EP-RI               -0.016***        -0.026***      -0.038***      -0.003***        -0.004***     -0.006***
                      (-7.33)          (-7.34)        (-7.11)        (-9.96)         (-11.73)       (-11.90)

                                                       39
Table 3 continued
Panel C: Partition analysis of mean forecast bias by size
                                 Small firms (N=59,819)                              Large firms (N=59,834)
                          Et+1              Et+2           Et+3              Et+1               Et+2          Et+3
 HVZ                   -0.108***        -0.178***      -0.260***          -0.005**            -0.006*       -0.006*
                        (-8.03)           (-8.58)       (-10.02)           (-2.46)            (-1.93)       (-1.75)
                               *                ***
 RW                     0.008            0.040          0.055***          0.005  ***
                                                                                             0.014  ***
                                                                                                            0.024***
                        (1.77)             (5.44)        (5.67)            (2.75)              (4.90)        (6.18)
 EP                    -0.038***        -0.061***      -0.101***           -0.002             -0.003         -0.004
                        (-6.23)           (-6.00)        (-6.40)           (-0.92)            (-0.92)       (-1.10)
 RI                    -0.024***        -0.037***      -0.066***           -0.001             -0.002         -0.002
                        (-4.09)           (-4.19)        (-5.16)           (-0.57)            (-0.50)       (-0.61)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW                -0.116***        -0.218***       -0.315***        -0.010***        -0.020***        -0.030***
                        (-9.14)         (-10.21)        (-11.18)         (-10.92)         (-11.16)         (-11.49)
 HVZ-EP                -0.070***        -0.117***       -0.159***        -0.003***        -0.003***         -0.002
                        (-6.40)          (-6.69)         (-6.74)          (-5.72)          (-3.10)          (-1.45)
 HVZ-RI                -0.084***        -0.141***       -0.194***        -0.004***        -0.004***        -0.004**
                        (-7.56)          (-8.05)         (-8.43)          (-6.24)          (-3.81)          (-2.47)
 RW-EP                  0.046***        0.101***        0.156***         0.007***         0.017***         0.028***
                        (10.17)          (10.93)         (10.73)          (9.74)           (11.86)          (13.29)
 RW-RI                  0.032***        0.077***        0.121***         0.006***         0.016***         0.026***
                         (7.53)          (10.21)         (10.65)          (9.18)           (11.45)          (13.00)
 EP-RI                 -0.014***        -0.024***       -0.035***        -0.001***        -0.001***        -0.002***
                        (-7.86)          (-7.76)         (-7.50)          (-5.50)          (-5.06)          (-5.47)
Panel A reports the time-series averages of the mean and median forecast bias for the three cross-sectional earnings
models and the random walk model, and their pair-wise comparisons. The time-series t-statistics are reported in the
parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, respectively. Forecast bias is the difference
between actual earnings and model-based earnings forecasts scaled by the end-of-June market value of equity (HVZ
and RW) or by the end-of-June stock price (EP and RI). The results are based on the sample of 119,653 firm-year
observations with non-missing t+1, t+2, and t+3 forecast bias from all models. Panel B reports mean forecast bias by
partition of analyst coverage. A firm is covered by analysts if there is one FY1 consensus forecast on IBES for year
t+1. Panel C reports mean forecast bias by partition of firm size. Each year, observations are sorted into two equal
sized groups based on their end-of-June market value of equity.




                                                          40
Table 4 Earnings response coefficient of the model-based earnings forecast, 1969-2008.
Panel A: Full sample
                                            Et+1                            Et+2                          Et+3
                                     ERC         Adj. R2             ERC         Adj. R2           ERC         Adj. R2
                                         ***
 HVZ                               0.034         2.5%***           0.041 ***
                                                                                 2.0%***         0.046 ***
                                                                                                               1.6%***
                                   (13.31)        (7.07)            (9.23)        (5.33)          (7.66)        (5.27)
 RW                                0.035***      4.5%***           0.057***      5.3%***         0.078***      5.3%***
                                   (13.33)        (6.02)           (13.07)        (6.55)         (12.20)        (7.06)
                                         ***
 EP                                0.040         5.0%***           0.062 ***
                                                                                 4.9%***         0.083 ***
                                                                                                               4.7%***
                                   (19.19)        (7.13)           (14.39)        (6.32)         (12.90)        (6.83)
 RI                                0.042***      5.2%***           0.064***      5.2%***         0.085***      5.0%***
                                   (18.02)        (7.27)           (13.83)        (6.45)         (13.57)        (7.05)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW                             -0.001       -2.0%***          -0.016***   -3.3%***          -0.032***     -3.7%***
                                    (-0.92)       (-3.35)           (-4.10)     (-4.93)           (-6.00)       (-5.76)
 HVZ-EP                            -0.006***     -2.5%***          -0.021***   -2.9%***          -0.037***     -3.1%***
                                    (-3.45)       (-4.36)           (-6.67)     (-5.35)           (-8.81)       (-6.00)
 HVZ-RI                            -0.008***     -2.7%***          -0.023***   -3.2%***          -0.039***     -3.4%***
                                    (-3.67)       (-4.51)           (-6.73)     (-5.49)           (-8.81)       (-6.14)
 RW-EP                             -0.005**       -0.5%             -0.005       0.4%             -0.005         0.6%
                                    (-2.19)       (-1.20)           (-1.14)     (0.58)            (-0.86)       (1.38)
 RW-RI                             -0.007**       -0.7%             -0.007       0.1%             -0.007         0.3%
                                    (-2.48)       (-1.51)           (-1.65)     (0.13)            (-1.28)       (0.76)
 EP-RI                              -0.002*       -0.2%             -0.002      -0.3%*            -0.002        -0.3%*
                                    (-1.69)       (-1.61)           (-1.26)     (-1.72)           (-0.61)       (-1.87)

Panel B: Partition analysis of ERC by analyst coverage
                                   No coverage                                         With coverage
                         Et+1          Et+2              Et+3              Et+1             Et+2               Et+3
 HVZ                   0.037***     0.034***           0.025**           0.049***        0.080***            0.112***
                        (9.62)        (6.88)            (2.09)            (7.58)           (7.61)             (9.21)
 RW                    0.041***     0.059***           0.082***          0.038***        0.061***            0.089***
                       (11.35)       (11.71)            (9.72)            (7.95)           (8.39)             (8.55)
 EP                    0.044***     0.062***           0.074***          0.043***        0.072***            0.106***
                       (14.00)       (11.99)            (9.58)            (9.78)          (11.70)            (13.45)
 RI                    0.045***     0.064***           0.079***          0.044***        0.073***            0.105***
                       (13.91)       (12.43)           (11.61)            (9.02)          (10.34)            (13.04)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW                 -0.004*      -0.025***         -0.057***         0.011**           0.019***          0.023***
                        (-1.71)       (-5.48)           (-3.80)          (2.49)             (3.00)            (3.04)
 HVZ-EP                -0.007***     -0.028***         -0.049***         0.006*              0.008             0.006
                        (-2.84)       (-6.29)           (-5.25)          (1.74)             (1.29)            (0.74)
 HVZ-RI                -0.008***     -0.030***         -0.054***          0.005              0.007             0.007
                        (-2.98)       (-6.34)           (-4.94)          (1.36)             (1.46)            (1.04)
 RW-EP                  -0.003        -0.003             0.008           -0.005            -0.011*           -0.017**
                        (-1.22)       (-0.63)            (0.72)          (-1.04)            (-2.00)           (-2.09)
 RW-RI                  -0.004        -0.005             0.003           -0.006            -0.012**          -0.016**
                        (-1.58)       (-1.27)            (0.34)          (-1.13)            (-2.25)           (-2.22)
 EP-RI                  -0.001        -0.002            -0.005           -0.001             -0.001             0.001
                        (-1.23)       (-1.34)           (-1.25)          (-1.00)            (-0.37)           (0.29)



                                                           41
Table 4 continued
Panel C: Partition analysis of ERC by size
                                      Small firms                                       Large firms
                         Et+1            Et+2             Et+3             Et+1             Et+2            Et+3
 HVZ                   0.033***        0.040***         0.043***         0.087***        0.149***         0.206***
                       (11.71)          (8.31)           (7.04)          (14.66)          (18.86)         (16.53)
 RW                    0.033***        0.053***         0.073***         0.070***        0.106***         0.146***
                       (12.64)         (11.81)          (10.05)          (12.57)          (14.17)         (12.87)
 EP                    0.039***        0.058***         0.079***         0.058***        0.099***         0.143***
                       (16.20)         (12.40)          (11.70)          (14.96)          (17.09)         (17.00)
 RI                    0.040***        0.061***         0.081***         0.059***        0.099***         0.141***
                       (15.55)         (12.10)          (12.09)          (15.41)          (17.09)         (17.90)
 Comparison
 HVZ-RW                  0.000         -0.013***        -0.030***        0.017***        0.043***         0.060***
                        (0.10)          (-3.16)          (-5.31)          (3.63)          (6.30)           (6.94)
 HVZ-EP                -0.006**        -0.018***        -0.036***        0.029***        0.050***         0.063***
                        (-2.50)         (-5.06)          (-8.20)          (5.92)          (7.54)           (6.07)
 HVZ-RI                -0.007***       -0.021***        -0.038***        0.028***        0.050***         0.065***
                        (-2.77)         (-5.36)          (-8.31)          (5.65)          (7.66)           (6.78)
 RW-EP                 -0.006**         -0.005           -0.006          0.012***         0.007            0.003
                        (-2.62)         (-1.23)          (-0.86)          (2.80)          (1.29)           (0.38)
 RW-RI                 -0.007***        -0.008*          -0.008          0.011**          0.007            0.005
                        (-2.85)         (-1.78)          (-1.40)          (2.64)          (1.49)           (0.76)
 EP-RI                  -0.001          -0.003           -0.002           -0.001          0.000            0.002
                        (-1.62)         (-1.52)          (-0.92)         (-0.93)          (0.14)           (0.82)
Panel A reports the time-series averages of the earnings response coefficients (ERC) for the forecasts from the three
cross-sectional earnings models and the random walk model, and their pair-wise comparisons. The time-series t-
statistics are reported in the parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, respectively.
The ERC is estimated by regressing the sum of the quarterly earnings announcement returns (market-adjusted, from
day-1 to day+1) over the next one, two, and three years on firm-specific unexpected earnings (i.e., the forecast bias)
measured over the same horizon. We standardize the unexpected earnings so that they have unit variance each year.
The results are based on the sample of 119,653 firm-year observations with non-missing t+1, t+2, and t+3 forecast
bias from all models. Panel B reports mean ERC by partition of analyst coverage. A firm is covered by analysts if
there is one FY1 consensus forecast on IBES for year t+1. Panel C reports mean ERC by partition of firm size. Each
year, observations are sorted into two equal sized groups based on their end-of-June market value of equity.




                                                          42
Table 5 Return spreads for quintiles of implied cost of capital using model-based forecasts
Panel A: Mean return spreads (%)

 Model      Quintile   ICC                    RET1 - RF                RET2 - RF               RET3 - RF
 HVZ        1          -0.73                  5.21                     4.96                    5.36
            2          2.16                   6.47                     7.60                    8.27
            3          5.19                   8.38                     8.21                    8.71
            4          9.19                   8.97                     9.60                    9.69
            5          22.08                  10.70                    11.62                   9.85
            5–1        22.81***               5.49***                  6.66***                 4.49***
            (t-stat)   (290.82)               (8.29)                   (9.68)                  (6.76)

 EP         1          0.47                   5.14                     4.79                    5.48
            2          2.41                   7.50                     7.91                    7.73
            3          3.84                   8.50                     9.15                    8.67
            4          5.67                   9.75                     9.38                    9.82
            5          12.38                  12.55                    12.66                   12.61
            5–1        11.91***               7.41***                  7.87***                 7.13***
            (t-stat)   (212.74)               (11.54)                  (11.53)                 (9.90)

 RI         1          0.05                   4.91                     4.78                    5.24
            2          2.28                   6.62                     7.57                    8.38
            3          3.95                   8.10                     9.00                    8.81
            4          5.79                   9.92                     10.23                   10.33
            5          11.26                  13.30                    12.64                   12.26
            5–1        11.21***               8.39***                  7.86***                 7.02***
            (t-stat)   (236.45)               (13.24)                  (11.79)                 (10.16)

Panel B: Comparison of mean return spreads (%) across models

                                               RET1 - RF                  RET2 - RF                  RET3 - RF
                                                        **
 HVZ - EP                                        -1.92                       -1.21                       -2.64***
 (t-stat)                                        (-2.08)                    (-1.25)                      (-2.69)

 HVZ - RI                                       -2.90***                     -1.20                       -2.53***
 (t-stat)                                       (-3.17)                     (-1.24)                      (-2.63)

 EP - RI                                          -0.98                      0.01                         0.11
 (t-stat)                                        (-1.09)                    (0.02)                       (0.12)

Firms are divided into quintiles each year based on the implied cost of capital metric (ICC) computed for each of the
three models (i.e., HVZ, EP and RI). See Appendix A for details of the model estimation and Appendix B for ICC
estimation. Panel A presents the pooled equally weighted average of buy-and-hold returns for the first three years
after portfolio formation, adjusted for the risk-free rate (RET1-RF, RET2-RF, and RET3-RF, respectively) for quintiles
based on ICC as well as the spread between the extreme quintiles. Panel B reports the pair-wise comparisons the
spreads. Figures in parentheses represent t-statistics, calculated using a pooled estimate of standard error. ***, **, *
denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, respectively.


                                                             43
Table 6 Regression of future returns on implied cost of capital using model-based forecasts
Panel A: Univariate regression of future returns on ICC

                         RET1 - RF                            RET2 - RF                                RET3 - RF

 Model      Intercept       ICC      Adj. R2     Intercept         ICC          Adj. R2    Intercept      ICC       Adj. R2
 HVZ         0.047*       0.314***    1.0%         0.057**        0.256***       0.7%       0.063**      0.147*      0.7%
             (1.72)        (3.42)                   (1.98)         (3.16)                    (2.19)      (1.80)

 EP          0.040        0.569***    1.5%          0.048*        0.544**        1.0%       0.050**     0.559**      1.2%
             (1.58)        (2.59)                   (1.89)         (2.46)                    (1.99)      (2.48)

 RI          0.038        0.649***    1.5%          0.049*        0.579***       1.0%       0.053**     0.573***     1.2%
             (1.47)        (2.81)                   (1.88)         (2.73)                    (1.99)      (2.79)

Panel B: Comparison of coefficient on ICC across the models
                                     RET1 - RF                               RET2 - RF                      RET3 - RF
 HVZ - EP                             -0.255                                  -0.288                         -0.412*
 (t-stat)                             (-1.07)                                 (-1.22)                        (-1.72)


 HVZ - RI                             -0.335                                  -0.323                         -0.426*
 (t-stat)                             (-1.35)                                 (-1.42)                        (-1.92)


 EP - RI                              -0.080                                  -0.035                         -0.014
 (t-stat)                             (-0.25)                                 (-0.11)                        (-0.05)

Panel C: Regression of future returns on all ICC metrics

                      Intercept          ICCHVZ                     ICCEP                  ICCRI                Adj. R2
 RET1 - RF              0.035             0.075                    -0.257                 0.972***                2.3%
                        (1.40)            (0.78)                   (-0.69)                 (2.84)

 RET2 - RF              0.042*            0.053                    -0.109                 0.808**                 1.9%
                        (1.70)            (0.54)                   (-0.26)                 (2.43)

 RET3 - RF              0.048*            -0.102                   -0.210                 1.057***                2.2%
                        (1.86)            (-0.94)                  (-0.41)                 (2.61)
Panel A presents univariate Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions of future realized returns on metrics of implied
cost of capital (ICC) computed for each of the three models. See Appendix A for details of the model estimation and
Appendix B for ICC estimation. The dependent variables are the buy-and-hold returns for the first three years after
portfolio formation, adjusted for the risk-free rate (RET1-RF, RET2-RF, and RET3-RF, respectively). Panel B reports
the pair-wise comparisons of the coefficients on ICC. Figures in parentheses represent t-statistics, calculated using a
pooled estimate of standard error. Panel C reports Fama and MacBeth regressions of future realized returns on the
three ICC metrics (i.e., ICCHVZ, ICCEP and ICCRI). ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level,
respectively.



                                                             44
Table 7 Implied cost of capital metrics and risk factors

                                LMCAP          BM           IDIO     STDNI       D2A       LFOLLOW
 Metric Intercept                                                                                            Adj. R2
                         (+)         (-)          (+)           (+)      (+)        (+)          (-)


 ICCHVZ 0.080***      -0.010***                                                                               1.4%
        (10.47)        (-3.31)
        0.193***      -0.017***    -0.028***   0.044***                                                       56.0%
        (15.08)       (-11.21)     (-15.72)    (17.81)
        0.181***      -0.018***    -0.027***   0.043***        0.027    0.013***   0.017***     -0.000        57.2%
        (13.40)       (-10.48)      (-15.25)   (18.08)         (1.57)    (2.58)     (5.12)      (-0.37)

  ICCEP 0.046***       0.003*                                                                                 0.9%
        (24.04)         (1.71)
        0.090***        0.000      -0.012***   0.025***                                                       41.5%
        (20.86)        (0.42)      (-15.24)    (22.10)
        0.045***      -0.008***    -0.008***   0.027***    0.222***     0.028***   0.026***     -0.001**      47.3%
         (8.91)        (-7.00)     (-12.00)    (20.27)      (9.26)       (5.72)    (10.04)       (-2.03)

  ICCRI 0.048***       -0.001                                                                                  2.1%
        (20.58)        (-0.70)
        0.061***      -0.002***    -0.008***   0.038***                                                       57.4%
        (13.41)        (-2.63)       (-9.98)   (24.21)
        0.038***      -0.007***    -0.006***   0.038***    0.115***     0.034***   0.019***      0.000        60.9%
         (8.97)        (-6.09)      (-10.00)   (24.44)      (5.10)       (3.73)     (7.38)       (1.48)
This table presents firm level regressions of the ICC metrics on the following risk factors:  (systematic risk), LMCAP
(size), BM (book-to-market), IDIO (idiosyncratic risk), STDNI (earnings volatility), D2A (leverage) and LFOLLOW
(analyst coverage). is calculated using monthly returns over the lagged five years (ensuring that at least 24
observations are available). LMCAP is the logarithm of market capitalization at the time of the forecasts. IDIO is the
standard deviation of the prior year’s monthly returns. STDNI is the standard deviation of net income (IBQ) scaled by
total assets (ATQ) measured over the previous eight quarters. D2A is the ratio of total debt (DLTT+DLC) to total
assets (AT). LFOLLOW is the logarithm of 1+number of analysts following the stock. See Appendix A and B for
details of the model estimation and ICC estimation. Regressions are estimated using the Fama and MacBeth (1973)
procedure. Figures in parentheses are t-statistics. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level,
respectively.




                                                          45
